---
title: Call for  Summer 2024 Applications
date: 2023-12-21
summary: "We are pleased to announce that applications for the summer research experience 2024 can now be submitted through the NSF ETAP system. We will review applications starting on February 1, and the application deadline is March 1. Our theme this year is 'Learning from Images,' and a list of projects is available on the 2024 tab."
draft: false
page_type: news
---

We are pleased to announce that our applications website for [REU applicants](https://etap.nsf.gov/award/5215/opportunity/6964) is now live. This year, we are using NSF's new ETAP system for the first time, which should make it easier for applicants to apply. We will start reviewing applications on February 1 and all applications received by March 1 will receive full consideration.

For more information about the application process, see [this page](../../apply/) and stay tuned for a list of projects to be posted a the [Summer 2024 tab](../../summer2024).


# Learning from Images

The amount of imaging data generated every day exceeds human imagination. With their ability to statistically analyze such large datasets, computational algorithms can enhance our ability to discover new patterns and improve imaging data quality for critical healthcare applications and beyond.

This theme's projects provide new mathematical insights and algorithms enabling learning from image data. The goals of the individual projects include improving algorithms for learning the distribution of image data, optimizing the measurement design to improve image quality, developing efficient algorithms for reconstructing image sequences, and generalizing machine learning techniques to learn transformations between images.

The projects build upon and advance state-of-the-art techniques from machine learning, numerical linear algebra, and differential equations. Students will learn about these techniques and be trained to combine them in new ways to build effective algorithms. Their analysis and experiments will provide new insights into the strengths and weaknesses of their approaches.

